netCDF datatype mess (#33)
eurec4a/how_to_eurec4a: how_to_eurec4a/netcdf_datatypes.md

# The issue with netCDF data types

```{admonition} TL; DR
:class: tip
If you want to be on the safe side, use only `SHORT`, `INT`, `FLOAT`, `DOUBLE`, `STRING` or array of `CHAR` as data types.
In particular, **dont't** use single byte integers, any unsigned integer and no 64 bit integer.
```

The data format netCDF which is used in many places throughout our community has evolved over time.

> During this evolution, the internally representable data types have also changed.

Author: I reworded the sentence.

```{figure} dataset-diagram.png
:alt: dataset diagram
:align: center
:width: 70%

Dataset diagram (From the [xarray documentation](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable/data-structures.html))
```
A dataset is a collection of _variables_ and _dimensions_.
Variables are multi-dimensional arrays and they can share dimensions (i.e. to express that `temperature` and `precipitation` are defined at the same locations, the three axes of the corresponding arrays should be identified with the same dimension label, that is `x`, `y` and `z`).
Some variables may be promoted into a _coordinate_, which does not require to store it differently, but it changed how one would interpret the data.
In the example above, `latitude` and `longitude` would likely be identified as coordinates.
One would typically use _coordinate_ values to index into some data or to label the ticks on a plot axis, while a normal _variable_ would usually be used to define a line or a color within a plot.
There may be _variables_ which should be _coordinates_ only for a specific use case and vice versa.

> It is useful to distinguish between _variables_ and _coordinates_ within the metadata of a dataset, but the representation of the actual data may be the same for both, _variables_ and _coordinates_.

Author: I meant to describe a data model which is broader than netCDF alone. So at this particular location, I wouldn't want to refer to the internal representation of `netCDF` in particular. Do you think this part needs more clarification that this is could be more than netCDF?

````{margin}
```{note}
HDF5 features `external` and `virtual` datasets which [can be](https://github.com/Unidata/netcdf-c/pull/1828) compatible to netCDF4 but can not be written using netCDF4 API.
```
````
Both storage formats store all data in a single file, chunking of the dataset is done internally.
If the dataset should be accessed from a remote location, usually the entire dataset must be fetched before accessing the data.

In Jan 2019 [HTTP byte-range](https://github.com/Unidata/netcdf-c/pull/1267) enabled partial reads from remote datasets have been added to netCDF-c, but as stated in the pull request, it is not meant for production use:
> Note that this is not intended as a true production
capability because, as is known, this kind of access to
can be quite slow. In addition, the byte-range IO drivers
do not currently do any sort of optimization or caching.

Thus, if a dataset should be accessed efficiently from a remote location, something different must be added, which is what OPeNDAP is for.

#### OPeNDAP

````{margin}
```{note}

> Datacenters used by EUREC4A and the How to EUREC4A book which provida data via OPeNDAP include Aeris, NOAA PSL, NOAA NCEI, MPIM RAMADDA and the specMACS macsServer.

Author: There's the HALO-DB, but that server currently has no support for OPeNDAP.

```
````

So, depending on the use case, different formats are optimal and none of them supports everything:

| format  | for storage | sending around | for remote access      | widely supported              |
| ------- | ----------- | -------------- | ---------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| netCDF  | ✅          | ✅             | ❌, works via OPeNDAP  | ✅                            |
| OPeNDAP | ❌          | ❌             | ✅, can share netCDF   | ✅                            |
| zarr    | ✅          | moderate       | ✅, very performant    | ❌, netCDF-c is working on it |

Thus, if we want to have datasets which can be used locally as well as remotely (some might call it "in the cloud"), we should take care that our datasets are convertible between those formats so that we can adapt to the specific use case.

## An experiment

Currently, the main use case for the Aeris data server is to publish netCDF files and retrieve them back, either via direct download or via OPeNDAP.
This experiment is designed to test under which circumstances data which has been created as netCDF can be retrieved correctly via OPeNDAP.

> In order to minimize additional problems due to the mix of incompatible libraries, all dataset decoding is done using the same netCDF-c library (independent of if the dataset is accessed directly or via OPeNDAP).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to minimize additional problems due to the mix of incompatible libraries, all dataset decoding is done using the same netCDF-c library (independent of the access to the dataset, directly or via OPeNDAP).
```

> The individual test cases differ between data types, the use of negative numbers and if the values used as numeric values or are to be interpreted as flags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The individual test cases show differences between data types, the use of negative numbers, the use of values used as numeric values, and the use of values interpreted as flags.
```

For each datatype, there is a drop down menu which shows the individual sub cases.
If any one of the sub cases failed, the datatype is marked as erroneous.

In each test case follows the same steps:
* The original dataset is dumped via `ncdump`
* The OPeNDAP dataset attribute structure (`.das`) is retrieved via `curl` to look at the raw response of the server
* The dataset as received via OPeNDAP is dumped via `ncdump`
* A little script checks if it detects any significant error between the original and the OPeNDAP dataset

### Results

`````{admonition} BYTE
:class: dropdown, error
````{tabbed} + numbers
original dataset:
```
$ ncdump test_NC_BYTE.nc
netcdf test_NC_BYTE {
dimensions:
	test = 5 ;
variables:
	byte test(test) ;
		test:_FillValue = 3b ;
		test:valid_range = 0b, 127b ;
data:

 test = 0, 1, 2, _, 127 ;
}
```

> data attribute structude via OPeNDAP:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data attribute structure via OPeNDAP:
```

Reviewer: This typo seems to be repeated in the lines below

Author: Thanks 🎉 I fixed it in the generating script.

netcdf test_NC_DOUBLE_neg {
dimensions:
	test = 10 ;
variables:
	double test(test) ;
		test:_FillValue = NaN ;
		test:valid_range = -Infinity, Infinity ;
data:

 test = -Infinity, -1.79769313486232e+308, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, _, 
    1.79769313486232e+308, Infinity ;
}
```

data attribute structude via OPeNDAP:
```
$ curl https://observations.ipsl.fr/thredds/dodsC/EUREC4A/PRODUCTS/testdata/netcdf_testfiles/test_NC_DOUBLE_neg.nc.das
Attributes {
    test {
        Float64 _FillValue NaN;
        Float64 valid_range -Infinity, Infinity;
    }
}
```

dataset as interpreted by netCDF via OPeNDAP:
```
$ ncdump https://observations.ipsl.fr/thredds/dodsC/EUREC4A/PRODUCTS/testdata/netcdf_testfiles/test_NC_DOUBLE_neg.nc
netcdf test_NC_DOUBLE_neg {
dimensions:
	test = 10 ;
variables:
	double test(test) ;
		test:_FillValue = NaN ;
		test:valid_range = -Infinity, Infinity ;
data:

 test = -Infinity, -1.79769313486232e+308, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, _, 
    1.79769313486232e+308, Infinity ;
}
```

✅
````

`````

### Summary

The result of this experiment is underwhelming but shows a clear picture.
A large set of data types can not be used reliably in a combination of netCDF and OPeNDAP.

> The failure modes however are very much different between the various types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The failure modes however differ significantly between the various types:
```

* 64 bit integers simply can not be encoded in XDR which is the binary encoding of OPeNDAP. Thus the server just fails and the user receives an error.
* unsigned short and unsigned int could be represented by OPeNDAP in principle, however the Server introduces spurious `_FillValue`s which additionally are of the wrong (signed) integral type such that the netCDF client library refuses to read the data. This is most likely a Bug in the specific server.

> * unsigned bytes could also be represented by OPeNDAP, but the values received by the client are wrong. This might be an attempt by the client to handle the erroneously delivered `valid_range` though. The big problem here is that this can result in an **error without a message**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* unsigned bytes could in principle be represented by OPeNDAP, but the values received by the client are wrong. This might be an attempt by the client to somehow handle the erroneously delivered `valid_range`. The big problem here is that this can result in an **error without a message**.
```

> * signed byes can work sometimes even if they are **not representable** by OPeNDAP. This is due to a [**hack**](https://github.com/Unidata/netcdf-c/pull/1317) which has been introduces into netCDF-c which is based on the use of the additional `_Unsigned` attribute which is created automatically by the server. The hack however only applies to the data values and not to the attributes. As a consequence, the data type of the attributes may be changed **depending on the values** stored in the attributes. In particular, **signed** bytes seem to work **only if they are positive**. The behaviour is however really weird, so maybe one should not count on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* signed bytes can work sometimes even if they are **not representable** by OPeNDAP. This is due to a [**hack**](https://github.com/Unidata/netcdf-c/pull/1317) which has been introduces into netCDF-c which is based on the use of the additional `_Unsigned` attribute which is created automatically by the server. The hack however only applies to the data values and not to the attributes. As a consequence, the data type of the attributes may be changed **depending on the values** stored in the attributes. In particular, **signed** bytes seem to work **only if they are positive**. The behaviour is however really weird, so maybe one should not count on it.
```

As a **consequence**, the only numeric data types which should be used in any dataset are `SHORT`, `INT`, `FLOAT` and `DOUBLE`.
`STRING` and `CHAR` (when used as text) seem to be ok, but they have not been investigated in this setting yet.

## Did we learn something?
Well, it depends.
In principle, these results are also present, but well hidden inside the [NetCDF Users Guide](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/documentation/NUG/index.html):

> within the [Best Practices](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/documentation/NUG/_best_practices.html) there's the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Best Practices](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/documentation/NUG/_best_practices.html) state:
```
